Crypto API obsoletions (#21121)
dotnet/docs: includes/core-changes/cryptography/5.0/instantiating-default-implementations-of-cryptographic-abstractions-not-supported.md

**.NET Framework only**

```csharp
// Return an instance of the default hash algorithm (SHA1).
HashAlgorithm alg = HashAlgorithm.Create();
// Prints 'System.Security.Cryptography.SHA1CryptoServiceProvider'.
Console.WriteLine(alg.GetType());

// Change the default algorithm to be SHA256, not SHA1.
CryptoConfig.AddAlgorithm(typeof(SHA256CryptoServiceProvider), typeof(HashAlgorithm).FullName);
alg = HashAlgorithm.Create();
// Prints 'System.Security.Cryptography.SHA256CryptoServiceProvider'.
Console.WriteLine(alg.GetType());
```

You can also use [machine-wide configuration](../../../../docs/framework/configure-apps/map-algorithm-names-to-cryptography-classes.md) to change the default algorithm without needing to call into `CryptoConfig` programmatically.

In .NET Core 2.0 - 3.1, abstract cryptographic primitive factories such as <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> always throw a <xref:System.PlatformNotSupportedException>.

```csharp
// Throws PlatformNotSupportedException on .NET Core.
HashAlgorithm alg = HashAlgorithm.Create();
```

> In .NET 5.0 and later versions, abstract cryptographic primitive factories such as <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> are marked obsolete, and produce a compile-time warning with ID `SYSLIB0007`. At run time, these methods continue to throw a <xref:System.PlatformNotSupportedException>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET 5.0 and later versions, abstract cryptographic primitive factories such as <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> are marked obsolete and produce a compile-time warning with ID `SYSLIB0007`. At run time, these methods continue to throw a <xref:System.PlatformNotSupportedException>.
```

(removed comma after word _obsolete_)

```csharp
// Throws PlatformNotSupportedException.
// Also produces compile-time warning SYSLIB0007 on .NET 5+.
HashAlgorithm alg = HashAlgorithm.Create();
```

This is a compile-time only change. There is no run-time change from previous versions of .NET Core.

> [!NOTE]
>
> - Only the parameterless overloads of the `Create()` methods are obsolete. Parameterized overloads are not obsolete and still function as expected.
>
>   ```csharp
>   // Call Create(string), providing an explicit algorithm family name.
>   // Works in .NET Framework, .NET Core, and .NET 5.0+.
>   HashAlgorithm hashAlg = HashAlgorithm.Create("SHA256");
>   ```
>
> - Parameterless overloads of *specific* algorithm families (not abstractions) are not obsolete, and will continue to function as expected.
>
>   ```csharp
>   // Call a specific algorithm family's parameterless Create() ctor.
>   // Works in .NET Framework, .NET Core, and .NET 5.0+.
>   Aes aesAlg = Aes.Create();
>   ```

#### Reason for change

> The cryptographic configuration system present in .NET Framework is no longer present in .NET Core and .NET 5.0+, since it does not allow for proper cryptographic agility. .NET's backward-compatibility requirements also prohibit the framework from updating certain cryptographic APIs to keep up with advances in cryptography. For example, the <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> method was introduced in .NET Framework 1.0, when the SHA-1 hash algorithm was state-of-the-art. Twenty years have passed, and now SHA-1 is considered broken, but we cannot change <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> to return a different algorithm. Doing so would introduce an unacceptable breaking change in consuming applications.

Reviewer: Suggest replacing "it" in the first sentence with "the legacy configuration system" or similar. Otherwise it's ambiguous as to what "it" refers to.

> The cryptographic configuration system present in .NET Framework is no longer present in .NET Core and .NET 5.0+, since it does not allow for proper cryptographic agility. .NET's backward-compatibility requirements also prohibit the framework from updating certain cryptographic APIs to keep up with advances in cryptography. For example, the <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> method was introduced in .NET Framework 1.0, when the SHA-1 hash algorithm was state-of-the-art. Twenty years have passed, and now SHA-1 is considered broken, but we cannot change <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> to return a different algorithm. Doing so would introduce an unacceptable breaking change in consuming applications.

Author: ```suggestion
The cryptographic configuration system present in .NET Framework is no longer present in .NET Core and .NET 5.0+, since that legacy system doesn't allow for proper cryptographic agility. .NET's backward-compatibility requirements also prohibit the framework from updating certain cryptographic APIs to keep up with advances in cryptography. For example, the <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> method was introduced in .NET Framework 1.0, when the SHA-1 hash algorithm was state-of-the-art. Twenty years have passed, and now SHA-1 is considered broken, but we cannot change <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.HashAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> to return a different algorithm. Doing so would introduce an unacceptable breaking change in consuming applications.
```

#### Version introduced

5.0 RC1

#### Recommended action

- The recommended course of action is to replace calls to the now-obsolete APIs with calls to factory methods for specific algorithms, for example, <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.Aes.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType>. This gives you full control over which algorithms are instantiated.

- If you need to maintain compatibility with existing payloads generated by .NET Framework apps that use the now-obsolete APIs, use the replacements suggested in the following table. The table provides a mapping from .NET Framework default algorithms to their .NET 5+ equivalents.

  | .NET Framework | .NET Core / .NET 5.0+ compatible replacement | Remarks |
  | - | - | - |

>   | <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.AsymmetricAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> | r<xref:System.Security.Cryptography.RSA.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  | <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.AsymmetricAlgorithm.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> | <xref:System.Security.Cryptography.RSA.Create?displayProperty=nameWithType> | |
```

(removed a stray character)
